+++ title = "Reactive, Streaming Stardog Kernel, Part 2" date = "2017-01-24" author = "Mike Grove" draft = true +++

In the first part of this series we did an overview of some of the reasoning behind the forthcoming changes to the SNARL API. Today I'd like to talk a bit more about the API and give some examples of how it's evolved.<!--more-->

## Selecting a Framework

There's a variety of reactive libraries to choose from:

* [RxJava](https://github.com/ReactiveX/RxJava)
* [Project Reactor](https://projectreactor.io/)
* [Reactive Spring](https://github.com/spring-projects/spring-reactive)
* [Cyclops](http://cyclops-react.io/)

All of these support [Reactive Streams](http://www.reactive-streams.org/) which is a multi-organization effort to define the semantics and building blocks of a reactive library. This is, more or less, [what's going to be in JDK 9](http://gee.cs.oswego.edu/dl/jsr166/dist/docs/java/util/concurrent/Flow.html).

I spent time tinkering with each of them; the Query API within SNARL is a natural fit for a reactive design, so I had a minimal prototype of this subset of the API plus an implementation of the [SPARQL Protocol](https://www.w3.org/TR/sparql11-protocol/) to serve as my playground. After some time with each, I settled on RxJava 2. It supports Reactive Streams, unlike its predecessor, and was the most comfortable to work with. It also had the bonus of seamless integration with [Hystrix](https://github.com/Netflix/Hystrix). If you haven't looked at the new version yet, they provide a good overview of [what's changed](https://github.com/ReactiveX/RxJava/wiki/What's-different-in-2.0).

But I think I really got sold on it when I discovered their hooks for [making testing easy](https://github.com/ReactiveX/RxJava/wiki/What's-different-in-2.0#test-operator):

```java
aCatalog.get(aDb, DatabaseOptions.CREATOR)
        .test().assertValue(aValue).assertComplete();
```

This is a snippet from a test case for getting a value from the System Catalog for a given database. The result of the lookup is a `Maybe<T>`, I'm expecting one value, or no value; the property is set, or it isn't. I can easily check that I got my one expected result and that I correctly signaled the stream is complete! This made testing a breeze because I didn't have to roll my own test utilities to do the same asserts. That little bit of extra productivity goes a _long_ way.

## Now let's look at SNARL

We'll start with the Query API since that's probably the most commonly used part of the API.

Creating a select query in SNARL still looks pretty familiar:

```java 
SelectQuery select(@Nonnull final QueryString theQuery);
```

`QueryString` is just a composition of the actual query string and the query language. This small change makes it easier for us to support different query languages on top of Stardog's query engine in the future. And for the common case, we offer the utility class `SPARQL`.

You get back a `SelectQuery` which is very similar to the fluent-style interface in the current version of SNARL. It supports all the same limit, offset, and parameterization configuration as the current interface. It's not until we execute the query that we begin to see the difference:

```java
Flowable<BindingSet> execute();
```

`Flowable` is the RxJava 2 represenation of a stream of data, in this case, `BindingSet` which is a single answer to the query. So we've got a stream of answers to the query that will get _pushed_ to us as they're evaluated. Great! If you're excuting this query against a remote database, these are pushed to you as they come in over the socket, and if you're querying the embedded server, these are pushed up from within the query engine.

Now let's look at some basic usage. Here's a _condensed_ version of answering a select query and writing the results in some format back to the caller as it stands today:

```
try {
	final SelectQuery aQuery = aConn.select(aQueryStr, aBase);

	// set limit, offset, bindings, active graph

	// wait here and write the results
	QueryResultIO.writeTuple(aQuery.execute(),
							 aFormat,
					         theExchange.getOutputStream());
}
catch (Exception e) {
	handleError(theExchange, e);
}
finally {
	theExchange.endExchange();
}
```

That's fine. No surprises there. A bit wordy, but, hey, it's Java. Let's compare that to what it looks like with the new API:

```
final SelectQuery aQuery = aConn.select(SPARQL.query(aQueryStr, aBase));

// set limit, offset, bindings, active graph

// continue on and write the results to the caller as they're computed
aQuery.execute()
      .doAfterTerminate(theExchange::endExchange)
      .doOnError(e -> handleError(theExchange, e))
      .subscribe(QueryResults.tupleResultWriter(aFormat, theExchange.getOutputStream()));
```

About half as much code, doing the same thing, but asychronously, and in my opinion, easier to read. Flexible enough that if I need to block and wait for the result(s), it's trivial to get the results as a `Collection<BindingSet>`. In fact, it's so easy, not only can a caveman do it, but it would be very straight forward to also provide an implementation of the existing (blocking) interface(s) on top of the new reactive ones, which is a nice bonus.

But I think were we start to see the benefits of the approach is if we want to attach a progress monitor. Or what if I wanted to memoize the results of the query so we can return cached results next time. With the current design, I'd most easily achieve that with some decorator. It might look something like:

```java
QueryResultIO.writeTuple(new MonitoredResult(aMonitorConfig, new ResultMemoizer(aResultCache, aQuery.execute())),
						 aFormat,
				         theExchange.getOutputStream());
```

Ok, that's workable. But we're losing readability. And we don't want to add too much latency to outputing each result when the decorators process the results, so we might want to schedule those on different threads. What's that going to look like?

```java
QueryResultIO.writeTuple(new MonitoredResult(aMonitorConfig, aExecutorService, new ResultMemoizer(aResultCache, aOtherExecutorService, aQuery.execute())),
						 aFormat,
				         theExchange.getOutputStream());
```

Now it's time to play a game, spot the query execution! Seriously, it's really buried in there. It works, but, that's not fun. And the dispatch in those decorators to other threads may get hairy.

What about the reactive version?

```java
aQuery.execute()
	  .compose(new Monitor(aMonitorConfig, aExecutorService))
	  .compose(new ResultCacher(aResultCache, aOtherExecutorService))
      .doAfterTerminate(theExchange::endExchange)
      .doOnError(e -> handleError(theExchange, e))
      .subscribe(QueryResults.tupleResultWriter(aFormat, theExchange.getOutputStream()));
```

This is actually two additional lines of code, but I think unarguably more clear. Implementing [operators](https://github.com/ReactiveX/RxJava/wiki/Implementing-Your-Own-Operators) like this is the normal way to use and extend the streams of data.

It's also worth noting the original case does not cover what happens when we're generating the results of the query faster than we can write them over the wire. We can't just send a firehose of results to the output stream, we need something more controlled that will let us use the resources available to us both efficiently and predictably. There needs to be something to provide [backpressure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Back_pressure#Back_pressure_in_information_technology) to the pipeline. With the previous approach this is something we'll have to provide ourselves. 

With Reactive Streams, backpressure is a native concept, and RxJava makes it easy to take advantage of this. Before that call to `subscribe` we can include `onBackpressureBuffer(100)` to insert a buffer with a capacity of 100 for handling the backpressure between our producer and the consumer.

# It's not just for query results

We're using `Flowable` and it's siblings `Completable`, `Single`, and `Maybe` which are designed for when you have `0`, `1`, or `0 || 1` results throughout the SNARL API.

For example, if you wanted to get the databases in the system, you'd call `Collection<String> list()` on `AdminConnection`. We probably use this most often in our tests like this:

```java
try (AdminConnection aConn = ... create connection ... ) {
	if (aConn.list().contains(aDb)) {
		// do something
	}
}
```

Can you spot the inefficiency here? We're allocating an instance of `Collection` which is basically not used at all. That's an allocation we didnt need to do, and more work for the garbage collector. What if what we were looking for wasn't in there? That's a total waste! If you're doing something wasteful like that once or twice, no big deal. But what if you do it a hundred times a second? Little things like that add up. Now the `list` method returns a `Flowable<String>` and the above code looks more like:

```java
try (AdminConnection aConn = ... create connection ... ) {
	aConn.list()
		 .filter(theDbName -> theDbName.equals(aDb))
		 .firstElement()
		 .subscribe(theDbName -> {
		 	// do something
		 });
}
```

Code is a bit longer, but just as clear, and avoids the allocation of the list. Similarly, dropping a database now looks like:

```java
aConn.drop(aDb)
	 .subscribe(() -> {
					theExchange.setStatusCode(StatusCodes.NO_CONTENT);
					theExchange.endExchange();
				},
				theError -> sendError(theExchange, theError))
```

We drop the database and if it worked, we send the success response, otherwise, we write an error response.

Even things like creating a database or committing a transaction will return a `Flowable`. This `Flowable` will be attached to the bulk load or commit progress itself and give you an easy way to track the progress of the operation. This is an example from the HTTP server where we're writing the bulk load progress as a series of JSON events back to the caller, who can attach a progress monitor on the other side to provide feedback to the user:

```
aBuilder.set(aMeta)
        .namedGraphs(aGraphs::get)
        .create(aFiles)
        .subscribe(Subscribers.create()
                              .onNext(e -> printProgress(aOut))
                              .onError(e -> sendError(theExchange, e))
                              .onComplete(theExchange::endExchange).build());
```

## What else is changing?

There are several other more cosmetic changes coming to the SNARL API. In most cases, we'll be returning a `Flowable` or one of its siblings as the result from a method. But sometimes returning a value directly is a more appropriate design. In those cases, if it's possible there won't be a value, we'll be returning an `Optional`; `null` will no longer be a valid return value from a method.

No checked exceptions. We started this effort when we first transitioned to Java 8, but there were some places you could find checked exceptions still in use for legacy reasons. We'll throw exceptions when appropriate, but more commonly, they'll be reported in the `Error` event (ie `onError`) of the subscriber(s) to the `Flowable`.

Additionally, you'll notice that the postfix `Exception` is omitted in almost every cause. Rather than `DatabaseDoesNotExistException` we are opting for `DatabaseDoesNotExist`. The inclusion of postfixed `Exception` doesn't add any new information, it's pretty clear from usage in a `throws` or `catch` clause that it's an Exception. We dont need to add more verbosity to Java.

Method naming will not adhere to the conventional Java-bean get/set nomenclature. In most cases the prefix isn't adding information you wouldn't have already known by looking at the usage. It's just something that requires extra typing without adding extra value.

You'll also notice that all public interfaces will use JSR-305 annotations to further document their behavior, which plays nicely with most IDEs, and we'll be using the [new javadoc annotations](http://blog.codefx.org/java/new-javadoc-tags/) `@apiNote`, `@implSpec`, and `@implNote` to provide clearer documentation for the codebase.

**[Download Stardog today](http://stardog.com/) to start your free 30-day
evaluation.**